\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ginac-examples.info
@settitle GiNaC Examples
@afourpaper
@c For `info' only.
@paragraphindent 0
@c For TeX only.
@iftex
@c I hate putting "@noindent" in front of every paragraph.
@parindent=0pt
@end iftex
@c %**end of header
@ifnottex
@node Top
@end ifnottex

@dircategory Mathematics
@direntry
* ginac-examples: (ginac-examples).                   C++ library for symbolic computation.
@end direntry

@finalout
@c finalout prevents ugly black rectangles on overfull hbox lines

@majorheading GiNaC Examples

This is a collection of code examples using GiNaC.

@contents

@chapter Input / Output

@section Archiving expressions @uref{archive1.cpp, (source)}

Two expression are stored in an archive on the disk and are restored again.

@section Input and output of expressions

@subsection Expression input @uref{derivative.cpp, (source)}

Interactively input expression and compute its derivative with respect
to the ``x'' variable.

@chapter Monte Carlo Integration

@section Example showing compile_ex @uref{compile1.cpp, (source)}

Simple example showing compile_ex with one free variable. Timing between CLN and C double numerics is done.

@section Using VEGAS from CUBA @uref{compile2.cpp, (source)}

An expression in two variables is integrated by using VEGAS from the
@uref{http://www.feynarts.de/cuba/, CUBA library}.

@section Example showing link_ex @uref{compile3.cpp, (source)}

Demonstrates the use of link_ex. Program has to be called more than once to see the effect.

@chapter Lanczos Approximation

The program lanczos.cpp calculates coefficients for use in the Lanczos
approximation of the gamma function. The Lanczos approximation is used by
the function inside GiNaC that approximates the gamma function numerically.
See the comments in the source file for more information.

@bye
